Added OAuth 2.0 for Native and Mobile Apps post (#2552)
okta/okta.github.io: _source/_posts/2018-12-13-oauth-2-for-native-and-mobile-apps.md

---
layout: blog_post
title: "OAuth 2.0 for Native and Mobile Apps"
author: dogeared

> description: "Native and Mobile apps have special requirements for using OAuth 2.0"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "Native and Mobile apps have special requirements for using OAuth 2.0."
```

tags: [oauth, oauth2, learning, programming, programming languages, education]
tweets:
- "Every wonder what the special sauce for auth with native and mobile apps is? (It's OAuth and PKCE)"
- "Dig into OAuth 2.0 for Native and Mobile Apps."
- "Ever hear of PKCE? You'll want to if you need to secure the native or mobile app your building!"
image: blog/featured/okta-node-tile-books-mouse.jpg
---

> :page-liquid:

Reviewer: This is only needed if you're doing AsciiDoc.

For rest of this post, we are going to focus on the Implicit and Authorization Code with PKCE flows.

The Implicit flow is typically used with SPA apps (untrusted) and returns a token directly to the browser. The Authorization Code with PKCE flow is typically used with native and mobile apps and returns tokens to this apps in a two part request flow.

## Why Not Implicit Flow?

Take a look at this sequence diagram representing the Implicit Flow:

> ![implicit](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/pkce-cli/raw/master/implicit.png)

Reviewer: Are you sure this renders? Images are usually done with a macro like the following:

```
{% img blog/php-laravel-react-app/game.png alt:"The finished application" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }
```

For now, we are leaving off doing anything with the token that we get. We’ll get to that later.

> For the purpose of demonstration, the above diagram has a vue.js app as the Client App. The Authorization Server is Okta. Let’s take a look at what’s going on in this flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the purpose of demonstration, the above diagram has a Vue.js app as the client app. The Authorization Server is Okta. Let's take a look at what's going on in this flow.
```

> 1. You access the app in your browser and click it’s login button

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You access the app in your browser and click its login button
```

2. The app responds with a redirect to the browser
3. The browser follows the redirect to Okta
4. Okta returns a hosted login form
5. You submit your username and password directly to Okta
6. Okta authenticates you and sends a redirect with a token in the URL

> 7. The browser follows the redirect to your vue.js, which parses the token out of the URL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. The browser follows the redirect to your Vue app, which parses the token out of the URL
```

This has been a solid approach for SPA apps. It’s a flow that gets your app a token in an untrusted environment without revealing any secrets. But it’s always had a dirty little secret (from a security perspective). Notice steps 6 and 7 above involve a redirect back to the vue.js app in the browser. Redirects are HTTP GETs. **As such, your only opportunity to get a token back to the app is to include it in the URL.** This is problematic from a security standpoint since the token is now sitting there in the browser history. It’s especially problematic if the token is long lived. A security professional would tell you that you’ve just increased the attack surface area. An example of why this is a problem is that many people sync their browser history across multiple devices further expanding the attack surface.

You can see the beginning of a token in the browser history pictured below:

{% img blog/oauth-2-for-native-and-mobile-apps/browser_history.png alt:"browser history" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

## Authorization Code with PKCE Flow

Take a look at this sequence diagram representing the Authorization Code with PKCE flow:

> ![pkce](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/pkce-cli/raw/master/pkce.png)

Reviewer: Same as above - does this work or should it be using the img macro?

> 1. You access the app in your browser and click it’s login button. The app creates a random value we’ll call: `v`. It hashes this value to get a result we’ll call: `$`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You access the app in your browser and click its login button. The app creates a random value we'll call: `v`. It hashes this value to get a result we'll call: `$`
```

2. The app responds with a redirect to the browser including the hashed value `$`
3. The browser follows the redirect to Okta
4. Okta stores the hashed value `$` for later and returns a hosted login form
5. You submit your username and password directly to Okta.
6. Okta authenticates you and sends a redirect with a short lived code we’ll call: `α`

> 7. The browser follows the redirect to your vue.js, which extracts the code `α` from the url

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. The browser follows the redirect to your Vue app, which extracts the code `α` from the URL
```

> 8. The vue.js app makes a POST request to Okta with: a Client ID, the original random value is generated at the beginning of the flow `v`, and the temporary code `α`. Okta validates the client ID, generates a hash of the value `v` and compares that hash to the `$` hash it stored earlier in the flow and validates the value `α`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. The Vue app makes a POST request to Okta with a Client ID, the original random value is generated at the beginning of the flow `v`, and the temporary code `α`. Okta validates the client ID, generates a hash of the value `v` and compares that hash to the `$` hash it stored earlier in the flow and validates the value `α`.
```

> 9. Okta responds to the POST request with a token directly to the vue.js app

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. Okta responds to the POST request with a token directly to the Vue app
```

The authorization code flow with PKCE has traditionally been used for native and mobile apps. Both of these kinds of apps are untrusted apps that can operate both within the context of a browser (often embedded) and can make back channel HTTP calls directly.

There’s an emerging recommendation in the OAuth community to favor this flow over the Implicit flow as it’s inherently more secure. The [OAuth 2.0 Security Best Practice](https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-ietf-oauth-security-topics#section-2.1.2) document recommends against using the Implicit flow. There’s a good post called [Why you should stop using the OAuth implicit grant!](https://medium.com/oauth-2/why-you-should-stop-using-the-oauth-implicit-grant-2436ced1c926) as well.
## Demo Time: Authorization Code with PKCE Flow in Action

> Okta supports the Auth Code with PKCE Flow for native and mobile apps. You can find the code example for this post here: [https://github.com/oktadeveloper/pkce-cli](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/pkce-cli).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Okta supports the Auth Code with PKCE Flow for native and mobile apps. You can find the code example for this post at [https://github.com/oktadeveloper/pkce-cli](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/pkce-cli).
```

> This is a [Node.js](https://nodejs.org) native app that runs from the command line. I wanted to keep this example as lean as possible so we could really see the mechanism of the flow in action. As such, it only has 4 dependencies: `commander` for parsing command line switches, `opn` for a platform-independent way to launch a browser from the command line, `request` to make HTTP requests and `restify` to provide a RESTful API endpoint to listen on.

Reviewer: we could really see > you could really see

> The [AppAuthJS](https://github.com/openid/AppAuth-JS) library is a high quality Javascript library that supports the Auth Code with PKCE Flow and hides away a lot of the details of what’s happening during the flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [AppAuth-JS](https://github.com/openid/AppAuth-JS) library is a high-quality JavaScript library that supports the Auth Code with PKCE Flow and hides away a lot of the details of what's happening during the flow.
```

### Add Okta for User Management

> Head on over to [https://developer.okta.com](https://developer.okta.com) and create yourself a developer account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Head on over to [https://developer.okta.com/signup/](https://developer.okta.com/signup/) and create yourself a developer account.
```

> Once you log in to your admin console, it’s time to create an app in Okta. Browse to `Applications`. Click `Add Application`. Choose `Native`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you log in to your admin console, it’s time to create an app in Okta. Browse to **Applications**. Click **Add Application**. Choose **Native**:
```

{% img blog/oauth-2-for-native-and-mobile-apps/create_native_app.png alt:"native app" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

> Click `Next`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Next**.
```

> Update the value for `Login redirect URIs` to: `http://localhost:8080/redirect`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Update the value for **Login redirect URIs** to be `http://localhost:8080/redirect`.
```

{% img blog/oauth-2-for-native-and-mobile-apps/create_native_app_2.png alt:"native app 2" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

> Click `Done`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Done**.
```

Copy the `Client ID` value from the `Client Credentials` section (toward the bottom) of the app summary page.

{% img blog/oauth-2-for-native-and-mobile-apps/client_credentials.png alt:"native app 2" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

### Watch PKCE Go

To run the app, do the following:

```
cd pkce-cli
npm install
./pkce-cli \

>   --okta_org https://{yourOktaOrg}.oktapreview.com \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  --okta_org https://{yourOktaDomain} \
```

  --client_id {yourClientId}
```

(You substitute in the values for your Okta org that you captured above)

> Note: Since there’s an async part of the flow - that is, waiting for you to authenticate to Okta, the app pauses its processing until you close the browser tab that you authenticated on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**NOTE:** Since there's an async part of the flow - that is, waiting for you to authenticate to Okta, the app pauses its processing until you close the browser tab that you authenticated on.
```

code (α): 7hJ0VfKvqzLbl3Ar1-fW

Here is the complete form post that will be sent to the /token endpoint:
{ grant_type: 'authorization_code',
  redirect_uri: 'http://localhost:8080/redirect',
  client_id: '0oahdifc72URh7rUV0h7',
  code: '7hJ0VfKvqzLbl3Ar1-fW',
  code_verifier: '0abb_599e_abd9_861b_4528_de1e_9b7a_91ad_5e20_a78b_06fd' }

Got token response:
{ access_token: 'eyJraWQiOiItVV92MHBJVGx5X0V3MTJfTzZuT1lWb081ZVBucm1Iek9wbkxfS2FHN0lzIiwiYWxnIjoiUlMyNTYifQ...',
  token_type: 'Bearer',
  expires_in: 3600,
  scope: 'openid profile email',
  id_token: 'eyJraWQiOiJUcGwtaVowcHhtQWpZb05ISlVSLUtjWkdCMGdUTWFUYkd1clQwd19GMXgwIiwiYWxnIjoiUlMyNTYifQ...' }

Calling /userinfo endpoint with access token

{ sub: '00udo3balxNhwKdSL0h7',
  name: 'Micah Silverman',
  profile: 'https://www.facebook.com/app_scoped_user_id/10156159259014459/',
  locale: 'en-US',
  email: 'micah@afitnerd.com',
  preferred_username: 'micah@afitnerd.com',
  given_name: 'Micah',
  family_name: 'Silverman',
  zoneinfo: 'America/Los_Angeles',
  updated_at: 1541796005,
  email_verified: true }
```

The random value `v` is called the `code verifier`. The hashed value `$` is called the `code challenge`.

> The app constructs a call to the `/authorize` endpoint with a query string that includes the `client id`, `code challenge` and `redirect uri`. It then launches a browser tab to the `/authorize` endpoint. It’s here that you will authenticate to Okta. Okta then redirects to the supplied value (http://localhost:8080/redirect) and includes the temporary code `α` in the url.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The app constructs a call to the `/authorize` endpoint with a query string that includes the `client id`, `code challenge` and `redirect uri`. It then launches a browser tab to the `/authorize` endpoint. It’s here that you will authenticate to Okta. Okta then redirects to the supplied value (`http://localhost:8080/redirect`) and includes the temporary code `α` in the URL.
```

> The Node.js listens for the response from Okta, extracts the code `α` and then prepares a POST to the `/token` endpoint including the `code` and the `code verifier`. Okta validate the `client id` and the `code` as well as hashing the `code verifier` so it can compare it to the `code challenge` it saved earlier.

Reviewer: The Node.js > The Node.js (app || process)

> Okta responds with tokens including an `access token`.

Reviewer: Be consistent, you call it `access_token` at the beginning.

Finally, the app uses the `access token` to make a call to the protected `/userinfo` endpoint. Okta validates the `access token` and returns the identity information for the user the token represents.
## OAuth, SPA Apps, and What’s Next
Hockey legend Wayne Gretzky famously attributed his success to focusing not on where the puck has been, but where it is going.

The Auth Code with PKCE Flow will replace the Implicit Flow over time. This will strengthen SPA apps by reducing the surface area of attack.

There are considerations for SPA apps that aren’t there for native and mobile apps. Mobile apps, for instance, will initiate the flow using an embedded browser to the `/authorization` endpoint. The app will complete the flow using a direct back-channel connection to the `/token` endpoint. In a SPA app, both parts of the flow need to happen from the browser. Dealing with XSS (cross site scripting) and CSRF (cross site request forgery) attacks is an important browser consideration for the `/token` endpoint.

> For now, you can see PKCE in action using the [pkce-clie](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/pkce-cli) app.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For now, you can see PKCE in action using the [pkce-cli](https://github.com/oktadeveloper/pkce-cli) app.
```

Here are some other blog posts you might like on the topic of SPAs, native and mobile apps:

* [Build a CRUD-y SPA with Node and Angular](https://developer.okta.com/blog/2018/08/07/node-angular-crud)
* [Secure your SPA with Spring Boot and OAuth](https://developer.okta.com/blog/2017/10/27/secure-spa-spring-boot-oauth)
* [Build a React Native Application and Authenticate with OAuth 2.0](https://developer.okta.com/blog/2018/03/16/build-react-native-authentication-oauth-2)
* [Build a Mobile App with React Native and Spring Boot](https://developer.okta.com/blog/2018/10/10/react-native-spring-boot-mobile-app)

> * [Add Authentication to Your Xamarin App with OpenID Connect](https://developer.okta.com/blog/2018/05/01/add-authentication-xamarin-openid-connect)

Reviewer: Blog post links should be relative.
